.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Axcient
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 15, 2021
.Dt GSTAT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gstat
.Nd print statistics about GEOM disks
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl adhospRrS
.Op Fl f Ar filter
.Op Fl I Ar interval
.Op Fl S Ar key
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility can be used to monitor I/O transactions of
.Xr geom 4
devices.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a , Fl Fl auto
Only display providers that are at least 0.1% busy.
.It Fl d , Fl Fl delete
Enable display of statistics for delete
.Pq Dv BIO_DELETE
operations.
.It Fl f , Fl Fl filter Ar filter
A regular expression that can be used to only show statistics for some
devices.
Only devices with the names matching
.Ar filter
will be displayed.
The format of the regular expression is described at
.Lk https://docs.rs/regex .
.It Fl o , Fl Fl other
Enable display of statistics for other operations
.Pq Dv BIO_FLUSH .
.It Fl s , Fl Fl size
Enable blocks' size statistics.
.It Fl I , Fl Fl interval Ar interval
Refresh the
.Nm
display every
.Ar interval
microseconds.
Adding a suffix of
.Cm s , ms ,
or
.Cm us
(the default) indicates that the update interval is specified in
seconds, milliseconds, or microseconds, respectively.
.It Fl p , Fl Fl physical
Only display physical providers (those with rank of 1).
.It Fl R , Fl Fl reset-config
Reset the configuration to defaults.
.It Fl r , Fl Fl reverse
Reverse the sort order
.It Fl S , Fl Fl column Ar column
Sort the devices by
.Ar column .
The spelling of
.Ar column
should match the displayed column header.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
displays information about the performance of GEOM devices.
It can be configured from the command line, or on-line by interactive commands.
In either case, the configuration will be automatically saved between
invocations.  It is based on the familiar
.Nm gstat
command from 
.Fx , 
but with several notable changes:
.Bl -bullet -width xx
.It
It can sort the devices.
.It
It can display or hide arbitrary columns of data.
.It
If the screen has enough space, it will display multiple devices side-by-side.
.It
It can pause the display temporarily.
.It
Its settings are automatically persisted to a configuration file.
.It
It does not support batch mod (the
.Fl bBC
flags).
If you need batch mode, you should use
.Xr iostat 8
instead.
.It
It does not display GEOM consumers, only producers.
.El
.Sh INTERACTIVE COMMANDS
These commands are currently recognized.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ic <SPACE>
Pause/unpause updating the display.
.It Ic <DOWN ARROW> Ic <UP ARROW>
Select one row of the table.
This is purely for visual focus purposes.
It has no other effect.
.It Ic <DELETE>
Delete the selected sort column from the display.
.It Ic <INSERT>
Bring up the column selector dialog box.
This can be used to control exactly which columns are displayed.
.It Ic +
Sort by the next column to the right.
.It Ic -
Sort by the next column to the left.
.It Ic <
Halve the update interval.
.It Ic >
Double the update interval.
.It Ic a
Toggle auto mode.
This has the same effect as the
.Fl Fl auto
command line option.
.It Ic f
Display only devices with the names matching a regular expression
(prompt for filter expression).
.It Ic F
Remove device filter.
.It Ic p
Toggle physical mode.
This has the same effect as the
.Fl Fl physical
command line option.
.It Ic q
Quit
.It Ic r
Toggle reverse sort.
This has the same effect as the
.Fl Fl reverse
command line option.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr systat 1 ,
.Xr geom 4 ,
.Xr iostat 8 ,
.Xr vmstat 8
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
utility appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
It was rewritten in Rust during 2021 by
.An Alan Somers Aq Mt asomers@FreeBSD.org
under the sponsorship of Axcient.

